GSoC 2019 Report (#2655)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/blog/2019/11/2019-11-17-gsoc-report.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Google Summer of Code 2019 Report"
tags:
- gsoc
- gsoc2019
- jenkins
- community
- events

> author: martinda

Author: Yes. The list is... jeff, oleg, marky, myself. I am forgetting someone?

---

> GSoC is officially completed and we are happy to announce that five projects were successfully completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GSoC 2019 is officially completed and we are happy to announce that five projects were successfully completed.
```

Reviewer 2: Also let's expand  the acronym

We held the final presentations in late August and Google published the results on Sept 3rd.

> We would like to thank all our students, their mentors and to all other contributors who proposed project ideas, participated in student selection, in community bonding and in further reviews.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We would like to thank all our students, their mentors and all other contributors who proposed project ideas, participated in student selection, in community bonding and in further reviews.
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

Google Summer of Code is a major effort which would not be possible without the active participation of the Jenkins community.

The final presentations can be found here:

* link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g19o24uzy6c[Part 1 presentations]

> * link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cMSbdGwGWp0[Part 2 presentations]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cMSbdGwGWp0[Part 2 presentations]
* link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=41dhyFC5Iak[Part 3 presentations]
```

== Summary

This year GSoC was a year-round effort for the organization and some community members.
I would like to start this report by thanking all participants, students, mentors, subject matter experts and community members who support the project and the students.
We could not do this without you.
We presented the
link:https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/e/2PACX-1vQf5RLIJXq8cPEKbCIaA4Bn3tMy5ITB4z2oGJKwLOJz_ne2AiNuSSvXi51nMDDDgA/pub?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000[2019 Jenkins GSoC report]
at link:https://www.cloudbees.com/devops-world/san-francisco[DevOps World | Jenkins World San Francisco] conference.

For the 2019 edition of GSoC, we started gathering project ideas in the last months of 2018, long before the official start of the program.
We upgraded the GSoC project section of the website with lots of information for link:https://jenkins.io/projects/gsoc/[students and mentors].
Students started to reach out very early on as well, many weeks before GSoC officially started.
This was very motivating.
Some students even started to work on project ideas before the official start of the program.

This year the org admin team had some very difficult decisions to make.

> With lots of students, lots of projects and lots of mentors, we had to request the right number of slots and try to match the projects with the most chances of success.

Reviewer: Is possible to elaborate on the significance of this number? What happens if it's too few, or too many?

Reviewer: Never mind, there's some discussion about this below

Unfortunately, we had a some difficulty getting all mentors to respond in time for the slot selection, thus we requested fewer slots than we could have filled.

> We have found that the community bonding phase was crucial to the success of each project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have found that the link:https://developers.google.com/open-source/gsoc/resources/glossary#community_bonding_period[community bonding phase] was crucial to the success of each project.
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

> Usually projects that don’t do well during community bonding have difficulties later on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Usually projects that don’t do well during community bonding have difficulties later on.
In order to get students involved into the community better, almost all projects were handled under umbrella of link:/sigs[Special Interest Groups] so that there were more stakeholders and communications.
```

> We adopted Zoom Meetings towards the end of the program, and we are finding it easier to work with than Google hangouts.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We adopted Zoom Meetings towards the end of the program and we are finding it easier to work with than Google hangouts.
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

We will talk about the projects a little later in the document.

== Running the GSoC program at our organization level

Here are some of the things our organization did before and during GSoC behind the scenes.
To prepare for the influx of students, we updated all our GSoC pages and wrote down all the knowledge we accumulated over the years of running the program.

We prepared a list of project ideas in a google doc, and we tracked ownership of each project in a table of that document.
Each project idea was further elaborated in its own google doc.
Since we wanted all the project ideas to be documented the same way, we created a template to guide the contributors.

> Most of the project idea documents were written by org admins or mentors, but occasionally a student proposes a genuine idea.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the project idea documents were written by org admins or mentors, but occasionally a student proposed a genuine idea.
```

> We also capture in that document contact information such as github and gitter handles, and a preliminary list of potential mentors for the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We also captured contact information in that document such as github and gitter handles, and a preliminary list of potential mentors for the project.
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

We embedded all the project documents on our website.

> We made extensive use of google sheets to track lists of projects and participants during the program.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We made extensive use of Google sheets to track lists of projects and participants during the program to rank projects and to track statuses of project phases (community bonding, coding, etc.).
```

We were trying to form mentor teams at the same time as we were requesting the number of slots, and it was hard to get responses from all mentors in time for the deadline.
When we request slots, we submit two numbers: a minimum and a maximum. The link:https://google.github.io/gsocguides/mentor/selecting-a-student#googles-selection-process[GSoC guide] states that:

* The minimum is based on the projects that are so amazing they really want to see these projects occur over the summer,
* and the maximum number should be the number of solid and amazing projects they wish to mentor over the summer.

We were awarded minimum. So we had to make very hard decisions: we had to decide between "amazing" and "solid" proposals.

For some proposals, the very outstanding ones, it’s easy.
But for the others, it’s hard.
We know we cannot make the perfect decision, and by experience, we know that some students or some mentors will not be able to complete the program due to uncontrollable life events, even for the outstanding proposals.
So we have to make the best decision knowing that some of our choices won't complete the program.

> Another thing that was hard was to get an overview of how all the projects were doing once they got going.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another thing that was hard was to get an overview of how all the projects were doing once they were running.
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

We were using Gitter chat for most communications, but from an admin point of view this is more fragmented than mailing lists.
It is also harder to search.
Chat rooms are very convenient because they are focused, but from an admin point of view, the lack of threads in gitter makes it hard to get an overview.

> Gitter threads was added recently (Nov 2019) but does not work well yet on Android and iOS.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Gitter threads were added recently (Nov 2019) but do not yet work well on Android and iOS.
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

Perhaps some kind of objective tracking tool would help.

In our organization, we try to get everyone to beat the deadlines by a couple of days, because we know that there might be events such as power outages,
bad weather (happens even in Seattle!), or other uncontrolled interruptions, that might interfere with submitting project data.
We also know that when deadlines coincide with weekends, there is a risk that people may forget.

> At the end of our project, we also held a retrospective and captured some ideas for the next few years.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
At the end of our project, we also held a retrospective and captured some ideas for the future.
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

Links:

* link:https://jenkins.io/projects/gsoc/2019/gitlab-support-for-multibranch-pipeline[Project page]
* link:https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1avMoEPMf5Ksc99106fv7bGikAh17GQZJZdwUWKOzYBY/[Link to coding phase 3 presentation]
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/gitlab-branch-source-plugin/[Source code]

== Recognition

Last year, we wanted to thank everyone who participated in the program by sending swag.
This year, we collected all the mailing addresses we could and sent to everyone we could the 15-year Jenkins special edition T-shirt, and some stickers.
This was a great feel good moment.
I want to personally thank Alyssa Tong her help on setting aside the t-shirt and stickers.

image:/images/post-images/2019-11-17-gsoc-report/swag-before-shipping.jpg[width=400]

We try to get our successful students to conferences when possible and when the budget allows it.
We were able to send one student to the
link:https://www.cloudbees.com/devops-world/san-francisco[DevOps World | Jenkins World San Francisco] conference.
We are working on sending students to the link:https://www.cloudbees.com/devops-world/lisbon[DWJW conference] in Lisbon, Portugal.

== Conclusion

> This year, five projects were successfully completed. We find this to be normal an in line with what we hear from other participating organizations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This year, five projects were successfully completed. We find this to be normal and in line with what we hear from other participating organizations.
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

> Taking the time early to update our GSoC pages saved us a lot of time later on because we did not have to repeat all the information every time someone contacted us.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Taking the time early to update our GSoC pages saved us a lot of time later because we did not have to repeat all the information every time someone contacted us.
```

Reviewer 4: LGTM

We held the final presentations in late August and Google published the results on Sept 3rd.

We would like to thank all our students, their mentors and all other contributors who proposed project ideas, participated in student selection, in community bonding and in further reviews.
Google Summer of Code is a major effort which would not be possible without the active participation of the Jenkins community.

The final presentations can be found here:

* link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g19o24uzy6c[Part 1 presentations]
* link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cMSbdGwGWp0[Part 2 presentations]
* link:https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=41dhyFC5Iak[Part 3 presentations]

== Summary

This year GSoC was a year-round effort for the organization and some community members.
I would like to start this report by thanking all participants, students, mentors, subject matter experts and community members who support the project and the students.
We could not do this without you.
We presented the
link:https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/e/2PACX-1vQf5RLIJXq8cPEKbCIaA4Bn3tMy5ITB4z2oGJKwLOJz_ne2AiNuSSvXi51nMDDDgA/pub?start=false&loop=false&delayms=3000[2019 Jenkins GSoC report]

> at link:https://www.cloudbees.com/devops-world/san-francisco[DevOps World | Jenkins World San Francisco] conference.

Reviewer 2: TODO; Lisbon

Author: I added a link to the Lisbon conference page.
